.TH UNDO 1 "July 2026" "undo 0.1.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
undo \- undo shell filesystem operations
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B undo
.RI [ options ]
.br
.B undo
.RB [ history | list | redo | show | clear | tui ]
.RI [ options ]
.br
.B undo exec \-\-
.I command
.RI [ args ...]
.br
.B undo init
.RI { zsh | bash | fish }
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B undo
makes shell filesystem operations reversible. It wraps
.BR mv (1),
.BR cp (1),
.BR rm (1),
.BR mkdir (1),
.BR rmdir (1),
.BR chmod (1),
.BR chown (1),
.BR ln (1)
and
.BR rename (1),
records every operation in a per\-user SQLite journal, and can roll each one
back \(em or replay it.
.PP
Because a filesystem operation cannot be reconstructed after the fact
(a native
.BR rm
destroys the data), undo does not observe commands \(em it
.B executes
them itself. A shell integration (see
.BR "SHELL INTEGRATION" )
transparently routes the wrapped commands through
.BR "undo exec" .
Deletions never unlink data: they move it to the freedesktop.org trash, from
where undo restores it precisely.
.PP
With no subcommand,
.B undo
reverses the most recent operation.
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B undo
Undo the most recent applied operation.
.TP
.B undo redo
Re\-apply the most recently undone operation. Performing a new operation
clears the redo stack (the undone entries become
.IR superseded ).
.TP
.B undo list
Show the actionable undo and redo stacks (newest first).
.TP
.BI "undo history " "[\-n N] [\-\-all]"
Show the full journal, every status included. Defaults to the 50 newest
entries.
.TP
.BI "undo show " id
Show one journal entry in detail: its recorded actions, trash locations and
any forced evictions.
.TP
.BI "undo clear " "[\-\-yes]"
Forget all journal entries for the current user. Prompts unless
.B \-\-yes
is given.
.B The trash is never touched
\(em cleared history just stops tracking, it does not delete anything.
.TP
.B undo tui
Browse the journal interactively (colored terminal UI) and undo/redo entries
with a live integrity check. Requires a terminal.
.TP
.BI "undo exec \-\- " "command args ..."
Execute a supported command and journal it. Used by the shell integration;
you normally do not call this directly.
.TP
.BI "undo init " shell
Print the shell integration snippet for
.IR zsh ,
.I bash
or
.IR fish .
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-f, \-\-force
Override a refused undo/redo. Files occupying a landing site are moved to the
trash first (recorded as evictions). Never overrides ownership or
protected\-path checks.
.TP
.B \-\-dry\-run
Report what an undo/redo would do, and whether it would be refused, without
changing anything.
.TP
.B \-\-json
Emit one machine\-readable JSON document on stdout (schema 1). Not available
for
.B exec
or
.BR tui .
.TP
.B \-\-yaml
Emit YAML instead of JSON.
.SH SHELL INTEGRATION
Add the appropriate line to your shell startup file:
.PP
.RS
.EX
# ~/.zshrc
eval "$(undo init zsh)"

# ~/.bashrc
eval "$(undo init bash)"

# ~/.config/fish/config.fish
undo init fish | source
.EE
.RE
.PP
The snippet defines wrapper functions for the nine supported commands that
route through
.BR "undo exec" .
A recursion guard
.RB ( UNDO_ACTIVE )
prevents re\-entry. Bypass a wrapper for a single call with
.B command mv ...
or
.BR \emv .
Set
.B UNDO_QUIET_FALLBACK
to silence the notice printed when a command falls back to the real tool.
.SH INTEGRITY AND SAFETY
Before an undo or redo, undo verifies that the recorded post\-state still
matches the filesystem: content by BLAKE3 checksum (for files up to
.BR UNDO_HASH_MAX_BYTES ,
64 MiB by default), otherwise by size and modification time; symlinks by
target; directory trees by an aggregate fingerprint. A mismatch refuses the
operation unless
.B \-\-force
is given. Symbolic links are never followed during inspection.
.PP
Operations are serialized by an exclusive lock, and each mutation re\-checks
its target immediately beforehand to shrink the race window. A crash
mid\-operation leaves a
.I broken
entry; nothing is lost, because every displaced node is in the trash.
.PP
Rollback is limited to the invoking user: the journal is private
.RB ( 0600 ,
ownership\-checked) and entries created by another uid are refused.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
Runtime failure, or an undo/redo refused by an integrity check.
.TP
.B 2
Usage error, or a refusal to operate on a protected path
.RB ( / ,
your home directory, the trash, or undo's own data).
.TP
.B 125
(\c
.B undo exec
only) The invocation is not supported; the shell wrapper runs the real
command instead. Returned only before any filesystem change.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B UNDO_DATA_DIR
Journal + lock location. Defaults to
.IR $XDG_DATA_HOME/undo ,
else
.IR ~/.local/share/undo .
.TP
.B UNDO_HASH_MAX_BYTES
Maximum file size that gets a content checksum (default 67108864).
.TP
.B UNDO_TREE_CAP
Node limit above which recursive operations are not journaled and fall back
to the real command (default 10000).
.TP
.B UNDO_QUIET_FALLBACK
If set, the shell wrapper does not announce fallbacks.
.TP
.B NO_COLOR
Disables colored output (also auto\-disabled when stdout is not a terminal).
.SH LIMITATIONS
Only commands that go through the wrappers are journaled;
.BR sudo ,
scripts, cron jobs and graphical file managers bypass them. Verification (not
blind replay) is what keeps a stale journal from causing harm.
.PP
Files above the checksum limit are verified by size and mtime only. Recorded
metadata does not include ACLs, extended attributes, hard\-link topology
within copied trees, or parent\-directory timestamps. Non\-UTF\-8 paths are not
journaled and fall back to the real command. The trash is the home trash
.RI ( $XDG_DATA_HOME/Trash );
cross\-device operations are handled by a verified copy. Clearing the journal
does not empty the trash.
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
.B mv report.txt archive/ ; undo
Move a file, then move it back.
.TP
.B rm \-r build/ ; undo
Send a tree to the trash, then restore it.
.TP
.B undo history \-\-json | jq .
Inspect the journal as JSON.
.TP
.B undo show 12
Show what operation #12 did and how it will be reversed.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR mv (1),
.BR cp (1),
.BR rm (1),
.BR chmod (1),
.BR chown (1),
.BR ln (1),
.BR rename (1)
.SH AUTHOR
nvrmnd
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright (c) 2026 nvrmnd. License GPLv3+: GNU GPL version 3 or later
<https://gnu.org/licenses/gpl.html>. This is free software: you are free
to change and redistribute it. There is NO WARRANTY, to the extent
permitted by law.
